In Computer programming (: general Computer Science), it is said that most problems reduce to problems of searching and sorting (Syracuse U, ECE 382). In Artificial Intelligence, when a computational agent has a perfect model of its world, its problem of reasoning about it's abilities and choosing actions to achieve a goal can be abstractly modelled as the mathematical/computer science problem of searching a directed graph.

Poole D. L. and co - author (2023) demonstrate that the number of paths expanded on a depth - first search at depth k is of order: O(b^k), assuming a fixed b, with b > 1.

Relative to the analysis presented in Poole D. L. and co - author (2023), for our purposes, we need to develop the foundations of our analysis more carefully. We posit a sequence of N identical tasks. As the N tasks are identical, the N goal nodes in each task reside at the end of the same path each time, i.e., at the same depth of search in a Depth - first search or an iterative deepening search, but the computational agent has no apriori information about which path leads from the start node to the goal node.

Given an infinite graph in which the fixed goal is located at depth k but whose location is apriori unknown, the number of paths expanded at depth k on an iterative deepening search is approximately b^k(b/(b-1))^2 for large k. By the limit law of McConnell, T. (1988), Lim(n->infinity)(An * Cn) = (Lim(n->infinity) An) * (Lim(n->infinity) Cn).

We collect this development and our result in Theorem 1: Given a sequence of N identical tasks, for an uninformed search, a randomized search strategy that alternatively does a depth-first search with probability p for one task followed by an iterative deepening search with probability 1 - p for the next is always superior in expected worst-case time complexity to an iterative deepening search strategy and the efficiency improvement is increasing in N. This contradicts the statement in Poole D. L. and co - author (2023) that, in an uninformed search, we cannot improve upon an iterative deepening search.

Theorem 2: In an informed search, the randomized search strategy described in Theorem 1 - employed together with a Branch and bound strategy - can retain the completeness and space efficiency of Branch and bound with iterative deepening, whilst improving the latter strategy's expected average case time complexity.

We fix a bar of finite length, L. A depth first un-informed search strategy here corresponds to identifying a bar segment and searching smaller and smaller sub-divisions of it. Theorem 3a, b: Randomizing the step-size, in step-size-based Search Algorithms applicable to iterative Numerical methods such as in Fadele (2024).

References

Fadele (2024), "Modernizing" Numerical methods/Algorithms III: On the efficiency gains from randomizing the SOR iterative method of solving a linear system of equations and other iterative Numerical methods, Researchgate.
Gensemer Susan (1988), Syracuse U, lecture notes on the Foundations of Econometrics (Probability and Statistics).
Goodrich and Tamassia (2011), Data Structures and Algorithms in C++, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, USA.
McConnell Terry (Fall 1988), Syracuse U Lecture notes on (MAT 512) 'Introduction to Real Analysis'.
Paul R. P. (1981), Robot Manipulators: mathematics, programming, control, The MIT Press series in Artificial Intelligence, USA.
Poole D. L. and co - author (2023), Artificial Intelligence: foundations of computational agents, Cambridge U Press UK.
Wirth (1975), Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs, Prentice Hall, USA.
De la Fuente (2000), Mathematical methods and models for Economists, Cambridge University Press, UK.
Rudin (1976), Principles of Mathematical Analysis.
Bjork (2009), Arbitrage Theory in Continuous - time.
Wilmott, Howison & Dewynne (1995), The mathematics of Financial Derivatives: a student introduction.
Kreyszig (2008), Advanced Engineering Mathematics.
